
Abstract

In this diploma thesis we present the development of mental state monitoring systems. We take advantage of the contribution of social media networks to the detection of mental disorders and in particular depression. We focus on the third task of the eRisk laboratory of CLEF 2021. That is, we utilize the data provided (posts from reddit) and the evaluation metrics (Average Hit Rate, Average Closeness Rate, Average Difference between Overall Depression Levels, Depression Category Hit Rate) defined by the organizers for the evaluation and development of our methods. The aim of this study is to measure the severity of the signs of depression based on the Beck’s Depression Inventory questionnaire. In contrast to the pre-existing approaches, most of which are based on traditional machine learning algorithms, we employ the transfer learning technique and in particular both of its strategies: feature-based transfer learning and transfer learning with fine-tuning. Our method sare based on the pre-trained models SBERT and RoBERTa, which are modifications of the BERT model. In addition, our methods can be grouped in three approaches: (i) feature-based transfer learning without training data, (ii) feature-based transfer learning in combination with machine learning classification and (iii) transfer learning with fine-tuning. Taking into account the ranking table of eRisk 2021 submissions, four of our proposed methods achieve the first place in the evaluation metrics AHR, ADODL, DCHR and the third place in ACR. Our contribution is not limited to achieving high scores; it detects the correlation between different approaches and specific sub-tasks. That is, the high performance of the first approach exclusively in the assessment of the general picture of the user’s depression and, respectively, the high performance of the second approach in predicting the answers to the questionnaire. This observation provides directions for future extensions. The code is available at: https://github.com/spartalisch/mssd

keywords: eRisk, NLP, transfer learning, feature-based, fine-tuning, SBERT, RoBERTa,BERT, depression detection, BDI, reddit
